---
layout: post
title:  "Leadership Hiring in India"
date:   2020-10-13 00:36:19 +0530
categories: leadership interviews
---
I do get a lot of questions about hiring in India and how is it unique
compared to hiring in the US. I thought I would pen in some of my
observations about hiring a great team in Bangalore. This blog focuses
on the hiring process and I will write a follow up on building an org
ground up at a remote site. 

Hiring the right talent at the senior level is a challenge in India.
Adding to it, every interviewer has a different perspective on the
expectations out of this job and the round table discussion reminded me
of  the 6 blind men and the elephant story. So I will try to cover my
experience hiring for Staff and Senior Manager roles in specific. 

**Step 1 - Candidate Pipeline**

Most of the senior level hiring does take time. So it isn't a great idea
to rely entirely on people applying for the job or recruiters reaching
out to candidates. While referrals are a great way to bring in good
talent, regular networking with industry peers as well as using LinkedIn
does help interest candidates that are passive in the market. 


**Step 2 - Phone Screen**

While it is time consuming for the hiring manager, I highly recommend
the hiring manager take the screening round for the senior hires.
Initial Phone screens are 2 way streets. While you can sell the
position, you can also try to understand the candidate's self-awareness,
ability to take the initiative when things are blurry and willingness to
own the problem helps give a background about the person. I found
discussions covering the last 2 areas extremely helpful while hiring in
India. For folks on the borderline, you may consider doing a next level
telephonic interview before you invite them for a day long interview.

**Step 3 - On Site Interview**

A typical on-site interview takes between 4-6 people. Having a diverse
interview panel from your team as well as teams that do not report into
you helps provide a 360 degree view of the candidate. Assigning a dual
role for each of the interviewers helps cover the strengths of the
candidate that are required for the role and also tries to avoid the
blind men and the elephant story. E.g. I recommend mixing System Design
with Communication/Articulation, Code Review with Collaboration, Domain
Expertise with Mentorship, Behavioural with Inclusiveness helps provide
insights into the person. Each interviewer should take about 45 minutes
to an hour to cover these areas. A quick round table discussion after
the interview helps close the loop with the candidate quickly and
provides a positive experience for the candidate. 

**Step 4 - Dealing with Declines**

It is not too uncommon to see rejections when hiring at senior levels.
While several of the people reject during the offer stage, some do send
in a decline after the offer acceptance and a few weeks before the
joining date. So it is ideal for the hiring managers to be in touch with
the candidates after they accept the offer. Also, do not get
disheartened if the offer is rejected. Do connect with them on LinkedIn
and do reach out to them at a later time for a different position.


**My Take Aways**

While selling the job, Learning, Earning and Impact of the Role can attract 
Junior, Mid and Senior Candidates.

During the interview, focus on examples of ownership, Continuous Learning and 
Customer Focus for senior roles. I found them to be useful in our hiring.

