---
layout: post
title:  "Building an Org at a Remote Site - Part 2"
date:   2020-10-23 00:36:19 +0530
categories: remote
---
**The first 18 Months**
-----------------------

I have been fortunate(or not) enough to be part of some of the early
stage startups as well early stage products built at a larger org. I
found one thing common in both places. The first 18 months in both
places is a make or break situation. In a startup, you are hoping to
find the product fit and customer traction before the money runs out. In
a larger org, you are hoping that the management\'s patience does not
run out while you build the product and consider alternatives such as
buy or partner. Add to the mix of working from a remote site, you have
an explosive combination. 

**Reality of a Remote Site**
---------------------------

*If you worry about the things that you cannot control, you are setting
yourself up for a lifetime of misery and frustration - Unknown Source*

Here are some of the realities that you will not be able to change. My
observations are based on companies with headquarters on the west coast
with a remote office in India. The observations are not specific to any
particular organization

-   The **Nerve Center** of an org will always be the Head Quarters. 
    There are multiple reasons: A large customer base (Mostly in North
    America) and the ability for execs to have interactive discussions
    works against a remote site. So it is obvious to see a large number
    of leadership roles clustered at the Headquarters. The epidemic may
    change this behavior with companies going all out remote.

-   **Time difference**. India and the US are on the opposite sides of
    the globe. Late night meetings are something that you cannot avoid
    but learn to **work your schedules around it**. You need to build
    bridges with your **network** to get all the information.

**What to expect during the first 18 months**
--------------------

**Time and Tide waits for None**
================================

You need to deliver value to your customers with your product and show
consistent progress to your sponsors. When you start off as a 1 man
army, you are alone and running against time. Here are some techniques
to manage precious time and deliver value to customers

-   **Planning and Setting Schedules**

As soon as I moved back to India to head the group, I came up with my
30-60-90 day plan. Everyone will be busy and no one will probably ask
you but I found sharing the plan makes it easy to get on the same page
with your **peers, team and boss**. I suggest you go with monthly plans
and follow disciplined schedules to hit the dates

-   **Ruthlessly Prioritize**

During the first 18 months, you are mostly in **"execute, execute,
execute"** mode. While you iterate and deliver products to early
customers, listen to their feedback. At this stage of the product, when
the customer is happy with certain good enough features of the product
but needs certain additional capabilities, focus on adding customer
requested capabilities. No need to further tune the capability. You may
also have to throw away code that the team put a lot of effort on. Be
transparent and reason out the prioritization with the team

-   **Take all the help you would get**

Help pours in from unexpected corners. Be open about taking help from
others whether it is for building teams or building features. In our
case, I had to build a Capacity Planning Service in less than 3 months
and I had only 1 person who was free to take this up. Fortunately one of
my colleagues in a different group had engineers with relevant
experience and were interested in working on a new product. This just
worked out and we were able to release the service just in time. 

**Building the Team**
=====================

If you are building a product ground up, you will probably hire about
50-60 people by the end of the first year. If your product has the
market acceptance and you are trying to add new teams to scale at a
remote site, you should be able to hire faster with one scrum team at a
time. 

Adding too many people at a rapid pace may have growing pains at a later
time. However it is rare that you get a perfect candidate. So look for
people who are willing to learn and are really motivated to join you. 

-   **Look ahead by 2-3 years**

During the major part of the first year, everyone works on everything.
Assuming you are hiring about 20 people per year and plan to double
every year, do not try to go with hiring 1 scrum team at a time
philosophy if your product is still evolving. Instead focus on hiring
**staff** level engineers/doers who can help evolve the product and are
looking for growing to the next level. The team may look top heavy
during the first year, but as you fan out teams in the second year, you
will be able to make appropriate adjustments.  Focus your initial hiring
on attitude, ability to work with uncertainties and ownership

-   **Delegate when possible**

It is very natural for the leader to be wanting to be involved with all
the interview decisions. While it makes sense that you hire the first
10-12 founding team members, you may have to delegate the next level of
hiring to the team. While you can be a participant in the interview
process, delegating the hiring to the leads/managers increases their
trust in you and frees up time for you.

-   **Interviews and Onboarding**

You and your team will spend a significant amount of time interviewing
and training new hires. **Document** the onboarding steps and keep it
current. Assign a **buddy** to a new hire during the first month so that
he/she becomes productive within a short span of time

**Culture**
==============

Building a strong team requires putting together the right culture. The
right culture has a multiplier effect. Usually people do appreciate
places that **trust** them and give them **autonomy**. In addition, you
would have to stress on the following and lead by example. 

-   **Customer Centric and Data Oriented**

Unless the employee\'s show empathy to customer's problems, the org
cannot win and keep customers. 

1.  If the employees are not **aware** of the problem, they do not
    empathize. Make sure your product has built in telemetry that
    captures the failures and their implications. Build dashboards and
    measure metrics such as customer uptime accessible by everyone

2.  Facilitate **interactions** with Support/SRE team and Customers.
    This could be an offer to do training on newer features, jumping in
    when the system goes down or just hosting them for lunch to get to
    know them

3.  Add Customer Specific **OKR** at the Org level and measure it.
    People love the OKR and this shows the org is aligned to make the
    customer successful. **Reward** people that have gone beyond the
    call of duty.

-   **Execution Focussed**

Unless the team churns out products that customers pay for there is no
business. Clearly articulate the vision and share the OKR openly amongst
the teams. Bonus numbers should match the OKR results. 

-   **Inclusive and Collaborative**

Inclusive and Collaborative culture will result in Innovation and a
motivated team. Here are some things that you may want to do

1.  Ensure everyone gets a chance to share their thoughts and opinions.
    Do not tolerate jerks.

2.  Be Honest and Transparent. Share the challenges and encourage the
    team to provide their feedback

3.  Set up group team building activities so that people get to learn
    from each other in an informal setting. It immensely helps with
    collaboration

**Product Fit**
=================

It usually takes time to **iterate** and build a product that gets
acceptance from customers. The initial set of product releases will
prioritise **feature and quality over time**. Most of the enterprise
customers that you interact with will not put your software in
production. This gives you time to improve while addressing key customer
pain points. 

Always focus on what more an **existing customer** can buy instead of
trying to go look for a new set of customers. Customers love products
that help them **increase their revenue** and **seamlessly integrate**
within their existing set up. So focus more on building capabilities
that helps the customers increase revenues and does not require them to
rip and replace their existing environments.  
